groups of mothers and their yarn are
harmed
gather together to form troops of up to
eight hundred monkey's geladas hands are
usually busy plucking grass instead of
grooming so to keep in touch
geladas have become the chattiest of all
monkeys the gossipy banter that can
sound to scientists like sentences with
words or even names for each other most
agree it's often use to defuse tension
and in geladas there's a lot to be tense
about there are gangs of young males
trying to steal away the women from the
family harems each handful of females is
guarded by a single male the harem
master the spare boys try and attempt
the girls away hoping the resident
father faker doesn't notice the male's
fresh teeth with each other they may
fight but it's usually just showing off
in case the girls are watching there's a
lot of flirting on both sides and then
if an innocent-looking female is tempted
to wander off past her guardian he has
to decide what to do
there is mostly sneak off secretly for
Affairs this is a blatant challenge to
his authority
the illicit couple just sit the suitor
seems to be using his hand to hide his
grimace he probably doesn't want trouble
chimps baboons and macaques may also try
to look innocent when they break the
rules this is a complicated social
problem using your brain to control
societies is called Machiavellian
intelligence after a 16th century
courtier who wrote on manipulating
political power instead of launching
into an attack the politician here tries
to grab a baby monkey etiquette dictates
nobody attacks anyone holding a baby so
they're like living flat jackets
the mothers are worried shall Christus
scooped up the youngest here are the two
males face each other the family man
backs towards one of his more loyal
wives calling for support one of the
youngsters suddenly switches for mother
to father this should calm things down
with the youngster attached the father's
protected and harem should unite but it
can go wrong
the youngster is sitting off the family
are frantic a harem master has no
protection from attack with a little
help from the mothers but the fathers
are meant to guard the precious young he
knows he's in all sorts of trouble if
the infant dies the mothers may not
support him again our brain too wrestles
with our own similar problems we are as
social and as competitive